# NMJ-MN-image-analysis
Morphometric analysis of neuromuscular junction microscopy images, and protein distribution and localisation analysis of immunohistochemically-labelled microscopy images.

## A.	NMJ IMAGE ANALYSIS

BACKGROUND:
-	Images of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) from fixed and immunostained tissue were acquired with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope. Immunostaining involved the use of an AChR antibody detected in the red channel and an SV2 and a 2H3 antibody detected in the green channel. All images were acquired with the same settings.

FOLDER HIERARCHY AND FILE STRUCTURE REQUIRED:
-	A folder called **z-Merge** which contains multi-frame (i.e., z-stack) RGB microscopy images in TIFF format. Each image contains a single endplate immunostained by an AChR antibody in the red channel and by an SV2 and a 2H3 antibody in the green channel. There is no staining in the blue channel. If each endplate has been cropped from a larger image, then each image may have different dimensions. The image filename must contain the mouse ID (e.g., FCD8-1).
-	A folder called **z-Endplates** which contains multi-frame (i.e., z-stack) single-channel microscopy images in TIFF format. These images correspond to the isolated red channel from the images in the **z-Merge** folder. The images have the same filename as their RGB source in the z-Merge folder.
-	A folder called **z-Terminals** which contains multi-frame (i.e., z-stack) single-channel microscopy images in TIFF format. These images correspond to the isolated green channel from the images in the **z-Merge** folder. The images have the same filename as their RGB source in the z-Merge folder.

WORKFLOW INSTRUCTIONS:
1.	Load MATLAB and set the directory to a folder which contains the subfolders **z-Endplates**, **z-Terminals**, and **z-Merge**.
2.	Run the MATLAB function **checkFrames.m** according to the instructions within the function file. This function allows you to loop through each image and define which frames need to be removed from each z-stack, in order to get rid of frames that contain overlapping axons stained by 2H3 in the green channel. Note that only consecutive frames at the start and/or end of the z-stack can be removed. The function saves an Excel file with this information, called **substackFrames.xlsx**.
a.	*Which frames to remove:*
i.	Remove frames at the start and/or end of the z-stack that contain axons, as these will interfere when trying to colocalise AChR and SV2 later.
ii.	Remove frames that correspond to two different endplates sitting on top of each other.
3.	Run the MATLAB function **makeSubstacks.m**. This function will use the information in the above **substackFrames.xlsx** file to remove the unnecessary frames from each z-stack and save the new stacks in new folders called **z-Endplates substacks**, **z-Terminals substacks**, and **z-Merge substacks**.
a.	There will be no substack images created for those endplates that have zeros in the Excel file as those are to be excluded.
4.	Load ImageJ.
5.	Run the ImageJ macro **CreateMaxProjections.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder, so select the z-Endplates substacks folder. This macro will create MAX projection images for each z-stack and save these in the same subfolder.
6.	Repeat the above step for the folder **z-Terminals substacks**.
7.	Open the **z-Endplates substacks** folder. Manually move all images with “MAX” in the filename into a new folder called **Final endplates**. Do the same with the folder **z-Terminals substacks** by transferring the images to the new folder **Final terminals**.
8.	Run the ImageJ macro **Endplates_binary.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select the folder which contains the images of the individual endplates, so select the **Final endplates** folder. This macro will convert the images to binary images and save them in a subfolder called Binary endplates. The background will be black, and the endplate will be white. Note that this macro also sets the scale!
9.	Look through all the binary images and if there are any that are inverted (i.e., the background is white instead of black), then transfer all the inverted binary images into a new folder and run the ImageJ macro **InvertBinaries.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder so select the folder with the images to be inverted. The macro will create a subfolder with the correct binary images, so transfer those back to the folder with the remaining correct binary images and delete the folder with the inverted images.
10.	Run the ImageJ macro **ConvexHull_area.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder, so select the **Binary endplates** folder. This macro will calculate the area of the convex hull of the endplate and save the results in a CSV file called **ConvexHull_area.csv** in the same folder. This macro will also create a new subfolder called **Convex hull area** with a copy of the binary images analysed, which will have an outline drawn around the endplate (this is only visible when opened in ImageJ) to show which object in the image was used for the analysis.
11.	Run the ImageJ macro **AChR_area.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder, so select the **Binary endplates** folder. This macro will calculate the area of the acetylcholine receptor staining and save the results in a CSV file called **AChR_area.csv** in the same folder. This macro will also create a new subfolder called **AChR** with a copy of the binary images analysed, which will have an outline drawn around the endplate (this is only visible when opened in ImageJ) to show which object in the image was used for the analysis.
12.	Run the ImageJ macro **Endplate_fragments.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder, so select the **Binary endplates** folder. This macro will calculate the number of binary objects in the image (i.e., the number of fragments that are at least 2 microns in length), and save the results in a CSV file called **Endplate_fragments.csv** in the same folder. This macro will also create a new subfolder called **Fragments** with a copy of the binary images analysed, which will have an outline drawn around each fragment identified (this is only visible when opened in ImageJ).
13.	Run the ImageJ macro **Terminal_binary.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder, so select the **Final terminals** folder. This macro will convert the images to binary images and save them in a subfolder called **Binary terminals**. Note that this macro also sets the scale!
14.	Look through all the binary images and if there are any that are inverted (i.e., the background is white instead of black), then transfer all the inverted binary images into a new folder and run the ImageJ macro **InvertBinaries.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder so select the folder with the images to be inverted. The macro will create a subfolder with the correct binary images, so transfer those back to the folder with the remaining correct binary images and delete the folder with the inverted images.
15.	Load MATLAB and set the directory to the folder which contains the **Final terminals** and the **Final endplates** subfolders. Run the MATLAB function **terminalColocalisation.m**. This function will check which AChR pixels (red channel) colocalise with the nerve terminals (green channel) and save the binary images showing only the colocalised pixels in a new folder called **Terminal colocalisation**.
16.	Run the ImageJ macro **Terminal_area.ijm**. The macro will ask you to select a folder so select the **Terminal colocalisation** folder. This macro will calculate the area of the colocalised area and save the results in a CSV file called **Terminal_area.csv** in the same folder. This macro will also create a new subfolder called **Terminal area** with a copy of the binary images analysed, which will have an outline drawn around the endplate (this is only visible when opened in ImageJ) to show which object in the image was used for the analysis. Note that this macro also sets the scale!
17.	Open the **Terminal_area.csv** file. For the terminals for which the Max column shows a zero, manually change the value in the Area column to zero and save the file (overwrite the original file). This is because when there is no object in the binary image, ImageJ calculates the area using the entire image (i.e., all the black pixels), which is wrong.
18.	Load MATLAB and set the current directory to the folder which contains the **Final terminals** and the **Final endplates** subfolders. Run the MATLAB function **compileNMJdata.m**. This function will combine the data from the following files **AChR_area.csv**, **ConvexHull_area**, **Endplate_fragments.csv**, and **Terminal_area.csv** into a single Excel file called **NMJ_data.xlsx**. It will also calculate the additional variables Coverage and Compactness.

## B.	MOTOR NEURON IHC IMAGE ANALYSIS

BACKGROUND: There are two types of images: Four-channel images are those stained for DAPI, ChAT, TDP-43, p62; Three-channel images are those stained for DAPI, ChAT, DYNC1H1.

NOTE: For the MATLAB functions to work, the confocal images must be in individual folders (one folder per image/stack) and the folder name must have the following format: E.g., "FCD7-2_L3_LEFT", or "FC5-28_L4_RIGHT" or "FCD12-1_L5_LEFT_1" or FCD8-25_L6_RIGHT_1" (i.e., "animalID_lumbarSegment_VentralHornSide_ImageNumber", where ImageNumber is optional).

WORKFLOW INSTRUCTIONS:
1. **For four-channel images:** Load the images (these are z-stacks) into ImageJ, and for each one, run the ImageJ macro **SC_IHC_prep.ijm**. This macro does the following in this order: 1) Sets the scale. 2) Defines the colours of each colour channel and saves the RGB stack. 3) Splits the colour channels and saves each channel stack individually. 4) Creates a maximum projection image of each coloured stack and saves these in TIFF format. 5) Converts each maximum projection image to greyscale, and saves these in TIFF format.
2. **For three-channel images:** Load the  images (these are z-stacks) into ImageJ, and for each one, run the ImageJ macro **SC_IHC_DynHC_prep.ijm**. This macro does the same thing as the above step, but for three channels instead of four.
3. Open the greyscale images corresponding to the colour channels that show the ChAT staining and the DAPI staining and arrange them side-by-side. Using the ChAT image as a reference, identify which nuclei correspond to motor neurons in the DAPI image. These are the nuclei that will be used for the analysis below. For each ChAT-positive cell: using the freehand selection tool, draw the outline of the nucleus on the DAPI image. Press t on the keyboard to open the ROI Manager and add this ROI to it. On the ChAT image, using the freehand selection tool, draw the outline of the cytoplasm that belongs to the cell whose nucleus was just measured. NB: Make sure the nucleus selection does not fall outside the boundaries of the cell outline. Press t on the keyboard to add this ROI to the ROI Manager. There are now 2 ROIs in the ROI Manager: one for the nucleus, and one for the cell outline, in this order. Repeat this for any remaining ChAT-positive cells in the current image. Remember that the ROIs must be added to the ROI Manager in the same order for each cell (i.e., nucleus first, then cell outline).
4. Make sure that all the ROIs in the ROI Manager are selected (Ctrl + A), then go to More > Save, to save the ROI Manager window with the filename **ManualROIs.zip**. Close the ROI Manager and all images.
5. Repeat for any remaining images.
6. **Background correction:** Load the TDP-43 channel image into ImageJ. Using the rectangular selection tool, draw a box in a region that represents the background (i.e., no cells). The actual size of this ROI does not matter. Press t on the keyboard to add it to the ROI Manager. Repeat this for at least 3 background ROIs from the same image.
7. Make sure that all the ROIs in the ROI Manager are selected (Ctrl + A), then go to More > Save, to save the ROI Manager window with the filename **BackgroundROIsTDP.zip**. With the ROI Manager and image open, run the ImageJ macro **SC_IHC_TDP_Background.ijm**. This macro will calculate the fluorescence intensity of the background ROIs and save the results in a file called **BackgroundIntDenTDP.csv**.
8. Load the p62 channel image into ImageJ. Repeat step 6. Make sure that all the ROIs in the ROI Manager are selected (Ctrl + A), then go to More > Save, to save the ROI Manager window with the filename **BackgroundROIsp62.zip**. With the ROI Manager and image open, run the ImageJ macro **SC_IHC_p62_Background.ijm**. This macro will calculate the fluorescence intensity of the background ROIs and save the results in a file called **BackgroundIntDenp62.csv**.
9. Load the DYNC1H1 channel image into ImageJ. Repeat step 6. Make sure that all the ROIs in the ROI Manager are selected (Ctrl + A), then go to More > Save, to save the ROI Manager window with the filename **BackgroundROIsDYN.zip**. With the ROI Manager and image open, run the ImageJ macro **SC_IHC_DYN_Background.ijm**. This macro will calculate the fluorescence intensity of the background ROIs and save the results in a file called **BackgroundIntDenDYN.csv**.
10. **Analysis of p62 fluorescence intensity:** Run the ImageJ macro called **SC_IHC_p62.ijm**. A dialog box will ask you to select the input folder so select the folder containing the image. This macro does the following: 1) For each cell, outlines the cytoplasm area, excluding the nucleus, and adds this as a new ROI in the ROI Manager. 2) Renames all the ROIs for easier identification. 3) For the p62 channel, it calculates the integrated density of the cytoplasm and the perinucleus for each cell separately, and saves these results in a file called **p62_cytoplasmIntDen.csv**. The results are in the order in which the ROIs appear in the ROI Manager. 5) Saves all the ROIs in the ROI Manager as a file called **ROIs.zip** that can be opened in ImageJ later.
11. Repeat the above step for any remaining images.
12. Run the ImageJ macro called **SC_IHC_p62_puncta.ijm**. A dialog box will ask you to select the input folder. This macro auto-thresholds the image (using the MaxEntropy method, which was manually tested for a few random images and was selected as the best method) so that only the puncta are identified. The thresholded image is saved as **MAX_C3_grey_Thresh.tif**. The macro also calculates the area and integrated density of the puncta within the cytoplasm for each cell separately, and saves these results in a file called **p62puncta_#.csv** (numbered according to the number of the cell, in the order that the cell appears in the ROI Manager, so there is one CSV file for each cell). Note that if there are no puncta in a cell, there is nothing to calculate so there will be no file produced for that cell. The macro also flattens all the cytoplasm ROIs onto the **MAX_C3_grey_Thresh.tif** image and saves this as a new image called **Flat of MAX_C3_grey_Thresh.tif**. This image is later on used by a MATLAB function. This macro also saves a new image called **Mask of MAX_C3_grey.tif**, which shows the masks of all the puncta analysed with the cytoplasm ROIs flattened onto the image. This image is later on used by a MATLAB function.
13. Run the MATLAB function **p62punctaCheck.m**. This function is used to visually inspect all the thresholded images produced at the previous step, to ensure that they have been done correctly.
14. Run the MATLAB function **p62puncta.m**. This function does the following: 1) Compiles all the data from the **p62puncta_#.csv** files (from the same image) into one file called **merged_p62puncta.xlsx** and saves this in the same image folder. The information from each cell is on a different sheet in the Excel file. For cells that do not have a **p62puncta_#.csv** file (because they have no puncta), an empty sheet is created in the Excel file. The Excel sheets are numbered according to the cell numbering in the ROI Manager. 2) Calculates the background-corrected fluorescence intensity of each puncta and adds this information to the **merged_p62puncta.xlsx** file. 3) Calculates the total number of puncta per cell and saves this information in a file called **p62punctaPerCell.xlsx**.
15. Run the MATLAB function **p62punctaMaster.m**. This function compiles the information from all the **merged_p62puncta.xlsx** files into a master file called **p62punctaMaster.xlsx**.
16. 
